README.md, before:

ODK Runner
==========

This is a proof-of-concept for a binary “runner” tool for the [Ontology
Development Kit](https://github.com/INCATools/ontology-development-kit).
That is, a program that could replace the `run.sh` and `run.bat` scripts
used to invoke the ODK.

Very experimental, do not use in production, etc.

Rationale for a binary runner
-----------------------------
* We need a single runner that works across all the platforms supported
  by the ODK (GNU/Linux, macOS, Windows), instead of having a shell
  script (`run.sh`) for GNU/Linux and macOS, and a batch script
  (`run.bat`) for Windows. Having different runners for different
  platforms makes it likely that they are not equivalent (this is
  exactly the case currently: the batch script is way behind its shell
  counterpart).
* We need a runner that can be executed “out of the box” on the user’s
  system, without requiring the installation of a runtime. This excludes
  almost all scripting languages (certainly all the scripting languages
  that I know of).

Since the runner is a binary program, we need to provide different
versions for each system, but at least those versions are compiled from
the same source code, so there is still only one runner to maintain even
if there are three different binaries to provide.

Usage
-----
Simply run `odkrun` followed by any command you want to execute within a
ODK container. For example, assuming you are in the `src/ontology`
directory of a ODK-managed repository and you want to refresh the
imports of your ontology:

```sh
$ odkrun make refresh-imports
```

The runner aims to offer (at least) the same features as the `run.sh`
script generated by the ODK, but more easily controllable using command
line options rather than environment variables.

For example, to run the above command using the _ODKLite_ image rather
than the default _ODKFull_, with the `run.sh` script you would need to
do:

```sh
$ ODK_IMAGE=odklite sh run.sh make refresh-imports
```

whereas with `odkrun`, you simply need to use the `-l` option:

```sh
$ odkrun -l make refresh-imports
```

See the output of `odkrun --help` for a list of possible options.

The runner supports the shell-based configuration file used by the
ODK-generated `run.sh` wrapper script. If the current working directory
contains a file named `run.sh.conf`, the runner will attempt to parse
that file and use the options it may contain.

### Seeding

The runner can also replace the `seed-via-docker.sh` script to
initialise a new ODK-managed repository:

```sh
$ odkrun seed -C my-config.yaml [other seeding options...]
```

Building
--------

### Building for GNU/Linux

GNU/Linux is the platform the runner is developed on, and building under
and for that platform should be straightforward:

```sh
$ ./configure
$ make
```

The resulting `odkrun` binary can then be placed somewhere in the `PATH`
and called directly. If you have administrative rights, you can directly
install it in `/usr/local/bin` with:

```sh
# make install
```

The `configure` accepts the usual Autotools options to change the
installation directory as needed.

If building from a repository checkout rather than from a release
tarball, you will need to generate the build system first. Make sure you
have the Autotools installed and run:

```sh
$ autoreconf -i
```

Then run the `configure` script as above.

### Building for macOS

Under macOS, the procedure should be the same as under GNU/Linux. Make
sure you have the _XCode Command Line Tools_ installed and run:

```sh
$ ./configure
$ make
```

then place the resulting `odkrun` binary somewhere in your `PATH`.

Beware that by default, the compiler seems to generate binaries that can
only run on a version of macOS at least as high as the version on which
the compiler is currently running (e.g., a binary generated on macOS
13.0 will not run on any macOS < 13.0). Use the `--with-min-osx-version`
option at configure time to change that:

```sh
$ ./configure --with-min-osx-version=11.0
```

Building for macOS under GNU/Linux hs been tested to work with the
[OSXCross](https://github.com/tpoechtrager/osxcross) cross-compiling
environmen. With OSXCross installed and its binaries in the `PATH`, the
ODK Runner may be built with:

```sh
$ ./configure --host=x86_64-apple-darwin21.4 CC=o64-clang
$ make
```

Adjust the host tripled depending in the version of the macOS SDK you
have installed with OSXCross. Here, _darwin21.4_ is for the 12.3 SDK.

### Building for Windows

Building for Windows has only been tested under GNU/Linux using the
[MinGW64](https://www.mingw-w64.org/) toolchain. With that toolchain
installed and its binaries in the `PATH`, build the runner with:

```sh
$ ./configure --host=x86_64-w64-mingw32
$ make
```

and place the resulting `odkrun.exe` binary somewhere in your `PATH`.

Copying
-------
The ODK Runner is free software, published under a 3-clause BSD license
similar to the one used by the ODK itself. See the [COPYING](COPYING)
file.

Commit message:

Prepare 0.3.0 release.
Bump version number. Update NEWS file. Update README to remove the "very
experimental" warning and add a short section about how to install the
pre-built binaries.

README.md, after:

ODK Runner
==========

This is a proof-of-concept for a binary “runner” tool for the [Ontology
Development Kit](https://github.com/INCATools/ontology-development-kit).
That is, a program that could replace the `run.sh` and `run.bat` scripts
used to invoke the ODK.

Rationale for a binary runner
-----------------------------
* We need a single runner that works across all the platforms supported
  by the ODK (GNU/Linux, macOS, Windows), instead of having a shell
  script (`run.sh`) for GNU/Linux and macOS, and a batch script
  (`run.bat`) for Windows. Having different runners for different
  platforms makes it likely that they are not equivalent (this is
  exactly the case currently: the batch script is way behind its shell
  counterpart).
* We need a runner that can be executed “out of the box” on the user’s
  system, without requiring the installation of a runtime. This excludes
  almost all scripting languages (certainly all the scripting languages
  that I know of).

Since the runner is a binary program, we need to provide different
versions for each system, but at least those versions are compiled from
the same source code, so there is still only one runner to maintain even
if there are three different binaries to provide.

Installation (pre-compiled binaries)
------------------------------------
(For an installation from source, see the ”Building” section below.)

From the page of the [last
release](https://github.com/gouttegd/odkrunner/releases/latest),
download the appropriate binary for your system:

* `odkrun-linux` for GNU/Linux (x86_64);
* `odkrun-macos` for macOS (x86_64 and arm64);
* `odkrun.exe` for Windows (x86_64).

For the GNU/Linux and macOS versions, rename the downloaded binary to
`odkrun`.

Place the binary in a directory that is listed in your system’s `PATH`
variable. Check that you can call `odkrun --version` in a terminal and
get the program’s version message.

Usage
-----
Simply run `odkrun` followed by any command you want to execute within a
ODK container. For example, assuming you are in the `src/ontology`
directory of a ODK-managed repository and you want to refresh the
imports of your ontology:

```sh
$ odkrun make refresh-imports
```

The runner aims to offer (at least) the same features as the `run.sh`
script generated by the ODK, but more easily controllable using command
line options rather than environment variables.

For example, to run the above command using the _ODKLite_ image rather
than the default _ODKFull_, with the `run.sh` script you would need to
do:

```sh
$ ODK_IMAGE=odklite sh run.sh make refresh-imports
```

whereas with `odkrun`, you simply need to use the `-l` option:

```sh
$ odkrun -l make refresh-imports
```

See the output of `odkrun --help` for a list of possible options.

The runner supports the shell-based configuration file used by the
ODK-generated `run.sh` wrapper script. If the current working directory
contains a file named `run.sh.conf`, the runner will attempt to parse
that file and use the options it may contain.

### Seeding

The runner can also replace the `seed-via-docker.sh` script to
initialise a new ODK-managed repository:

```sh
$ odkrun seed -C my-config.yaml [other seeding options...]
```

Building
--------

### Building for GNU/Linux

GNU/Linux is the platform the runner is developed on, and building under
and for that platform should be straightforward:

```sh
$ ./configure
$ make
```

The resulting `odkrun` binary can then be placed somewhere in the `PATH`
and called directly. If you have administrative rights, you can directly
install it in `/usr/local/bin` with:

```sh
# make install
```

The `configure` accepts the usual Autotools options to change the
installation directory as needed.

If building from a repository checkout rather than from a release
tarball, you will need to generate the build system first. Make sure you
have the Autotools installed and run:

```sh
$ autoreconf -i
```

Then run the `configure` script as above.

### Building for macOS

Under macOS, the procedure should be the same as under GNU/Linux. Make
sure you have the _XCode Command Line Tools_ installed and run:

```sh
$ ./configure
$ make
```

then place the resulting `odkrun` binary somewhere in your `PATH`.

Beware that by default, the compiler seems to generate binaries that can
only run on a version of macOS at least as high as the version on which
the compiler is currently running (e.g., a binary generated on macOS
13.0 will not run on any macOS < 13.0). Use the `--with-min-osx-version`
option at configure time to change that:

```sh
$ ./configure --with-min-osx-version=11.0
```

Building for macOS under GNU/Linux has been tested to work with the
[OSXCross](https://github.com/tpoechtrager/osxcross) cross-compiling
environment. With OSXCross installed and its binaries in the `PATH`, the
ODK Runner may be built with:

```sh
$ ./configure --host=x86_64-apple-darwin21.4 CC=o64-clang
$ make
```

Adjust the host tripled depending in the version of the macOS SDK you
have installed with OSXCross. Here, _darwin21.4_ is for the 12.3 SDK.

### Building for Windows

Building for Windows has only been tested under GNU/Linux using the
[MinGW64](https://www.mingw-w64.org/) toolchain. With that toolchain
installed and its binaries in the `PATH`, build the runner with:

```sh
$ ./configure --host=x86_64-w64-mingw32
$ make
```

and place the resulting `odkrun.exe` binary somewhere in your `PATH`.

Copying
-------
The ODK Runner is free software, published under a 3-clause BSD license
similar to the one used by the ODK itself. See the [COPYING](COPYING)
file.
